# scRNAseq

## Introduction

Single-cell RNA sequencing is a useful method to investigate the transcriptome of each cell. Millions of cells can be studied at one time, allowing cell types to be accurately identified and advancing many areas of research including health and disease (Jovic et al., 2022). 

A typical scRNAseq workflow consists of isolating RNA from cells of interest, reverse transcribing it into cDNA, amplifying it, and sequencing it (Jovic et al., 2022). Once sequenced, computational methods are applied to evaluate differences in gene expression. Typical steps of this process include preprocessing and quality checks, gene filtering, normalisation, differential expression analysis, feature selection, dimensionality reduction, batch correction, cluster analysis, cluster annotation, and more (He, Lin, & Chen, 2022; Billato et al., 2025).  

Several tools and packages exist for these purposes (He, Lin, & Chen, 2022). A popular and useful R package is Seurat (He, Lin, & Chen, 2022; Butler et al., 2018), which notably exhibits good clustering performance (Germain, Sonrel, & Robinson; 2020). While other available tools like OSCA (Amezquita et al., 2020) and scrapper (Lun & Kancherla, 2023) have been shown to cluster data more accurately than Seurat (Billato et al., 2025), I will use Seurat for my analysis. I chose Seurat given its ease of use (comprehensive vignettes and tutorials) and ability to perform all necessary aspects of the analysis while only using one package. 
Kazer et al. (2024) studied the differences in transcription between different tissue types in the nasal mucosa of mice before and during primary and secondary infection by influenza A virus, in order to capture changes in the nasal mucosa over the course of infection. The three tissue types included the respiratory mucosa (RM), the olfactory mucosa (OM), and the lateral nasal gland (LNG). I will use data from this study (in Seurat object format) to partially recreate the work of Kazer et al. (2024) and evaluate differences in gene expression between the three tissue types. 


## Methods

I loaded the data as a Seurat object into R Studio v4.5.2. For reproducibility, I used as many of the same filtering parameters as Kazer et al. (2024) as possible. I retained only cells with unique feature counts over 500, percentage of mitochondrial DNA less than 15%, and cells with RNA counts between 750 and 100,000, cells with less than 10,000 hashes and removed genes not expressed in at least ten cells. However, I also chose to filter out cells with unique feature counts over 2500, as per the “Seurat Guided Clustering Tutorial” (https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/pbmc3k_tutorial.html#cluster-the-cells). I normalised the data using the Log Normalise method, and the variance stabilising transformation with 5000 features. I then scaled the data using the scaleData function from Seurat. I used Seurat v5.4.0.

I ran a PCA to reduce dimensionality and used the elbow method to determine the optimal number of principal components. I used the optimal number of PCs to find clusters in the data using a resolution value of 0.5, as specified by the “Seurat Guided Clustering Tutorial” (https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/pbmc3k_tutorial.html#cluster-the-cells). I annotated the clusters with the SingleR package v2.12.0 (Aran et al., 2019), using the fine-scale labels for more detail as per Lun (2025). I focused on only one cell type cluster (neurons) for further analyses.

I pseudobulked the samples in order to assess differential expression of genes (as per Murphy & Skene, 2022) in the neurons cluster, which I did with DESeq2 v1.50.2 (Love, Hubers, & Anders, 2014). I looked at the expression of genes between time points: comparing gene expression at two, five, eight, and fourteen days post influenza infection compared to naïve state (0 days post infection; Kazer et al., 2025). I then performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis with the clusterProfiler package v.4.18.4 (Yu et al., 2012), focusing on comparing naïve vs fourteen days post infection time points. 
